Jackson Clawson
Intermediate Web Design
3/19/16

Project Proposal

For my final project, I would like to build a music-related web app. A common hurdle that novice musicians have to get over, especially beginner jazz musicians, is learning how to play the chords on the page and understanding what they are playing. There are many different ways to play every chord, and it takes a lot of practice to get comfortable with them to the point that you don't have to think about it when someone tells you "play a Bb13 b9 there." It is also vitally important that jazz musicians don't just play notes that someone tells them to play. They must be able to understand the theory behind every note in order to improvise and apply the same theory in any key. The idea I've come up with is a web app that would tell users how they can play certain chords, including inversions, as well as be able to tell users what chord they are playing. The app would use the computer's keystrokes as note values, and would also possibly be able to read data from an external MIDI instrument. That is the base functionality that I am invisioning, and would be a helpful app for beginners. I'm imagining a keyboard display on screen that shows what the user is playing, and keys may light up to show users how to play certain chords, for example. 
I don't foresee that functionality being an enormous hurdle, and I have a bunch of other feature ideas that would make the web app unique and more helpful for a wider audience. One idea is to allow users to input the chords for an entire song. The user would then press play and play along to a metronome, and the app would evaluate how well they are playing the chords, whether they missed any chords, and/or how well they are improvising.
Another idea that somewhat builds off of the base functionality would be to have performances of famous musicians loaded into the app, and it would teach the user how they are playing certain things. This idea itself could go in many directions, but my initial focus was turning it into a rhythm exercise. Often times in a band setting, certain songs/grooves just don't feel right, and it can often hard to fix or even describe. The web app would provide a way for keyboardists to practice their groove in multiple genres, learning from and playing along with famous musicians. It would be able to very accurately code the rhythm of a single instrument from a given passage, teach the user how to play it, and then record the user playing it and precisely analyze the their timing in relation to the source. It would ideally be loaded with samples from any number of genres, and the user could pick and choose which to work on. 
A final idea (one less difficult than the others) would be to provide the user not only with various ways to play the same chord, but also to give them different chords to play in its place. Reharmonization (changing the chords but usually not the melody) is a widely used technique when playing someone else's song, regardless of genre. The web app could allow musicians to input a melody and the correct chords, and it would provide various ideas for how the song could be reharmonized. While the basic idea of this feature would be less difficult to implement, it could go very deep as well, since reharmonization decision-making often depends on the context of the melody, other chords around the one in question, and possibly the location of the chord in time. 

Regardless of the difficulty ofthe features I end up building, the design process will likely not be overwhelming. In terms of actual implementation, I'm thinking that if I run into trouble I could simulate parts of the difficult algorithms for the sake of this class. Or perhaps I could bring on a friend to help out if I run into that issue? Either way, I'm hoping that I pick a project I'm passionate about and design it well enough so that I will want to keep working on it.